# Support your local mill

## -- If you are lucky enough to have one --

Mankind has been using grain for at least 5,000 years - probably much longer since the time of the hunter/gatherers. Grain was found in the pyramids, the bible has numerous references to grain and milling (Exodus Chap. II V.5 ... the maid servant that is behind the mill) etc. etc. Without doubt the reducing of grain to meal (or flour) is the oldest continuously conducted industry of the world. Amongst primitive man's earliest efforts (apart from warfare) the pounding of grain, nuts, berries, acorns and etc. was paramount to produce a coarse kind of flour.

Following the pounding of grain for flour production came the saddle stone, so baned fron the shape. This comprised a concave stone and a roller shaped stone which was worked backwards and forwards over the grain so producing a wholemeal flour. In 1921 B.C. Abraham (the Patriarch) who migrated to Canaan from Chaldea instructed his wife Sarah to "Make quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it and make cakes" (Genesis Chap. 18 V.6) fir the angelic visitors. The visitors rested under a tree outside the tend whilst Sarah performed her task. This ancient scene has practically been reproduced from the time of Sarah to the present day as seen in Africe and India. Certainly David Livingstone records women in Central Africa producing meal with a saddlestone as do H.M. Stanley and Sir Samuel Baker during their African travels. Even Samson when taken captive "did grind in the prison house".

Around 2300 years ago the first revolving millstone driven by hand appeared in Italy (i.e. Roman) called the mola varsatilis (the varatile mill) or the quern. The quern constituted the first complete grinding machine and from its advent corn milling was generally no longer conducted by mere loose stones. The quern is distinguished from the more primitive earlier stones primarily by its circular motion; the upper stone revolving upon the fixed lower stone. The first querns were more cononical presumably because it was known by the Romans as the "mola trustalis" or the thrusting mill.

I thought that the flour needed to be provided with a downward flow to enable it to fall from the stones. As the principles of the quern became understood however the stones became more flattened and eventually the grinding surfaces became perfectly flat.

About the same time as the quern was being develped the first animal driven mill appeared, these were also modified to be driven by slaves. With the combined system of slave and animal mills in Rome the citizens enjoyed free food, for over three centruies, at the expense of the state. As the Roman Empire spread so did their technology and the quern becoman commonplace throughout Europe.

Several centuries after the quern the first power machines devised by human ingenuity was the water driven wheel for irrigation. The water powered corn mill was its immediate successor. It has been claimed that the British invented watermills and the Romans priated the idea from them. It appears that the British knew nothing of querns before the arrival of the Romans so would have no idea of applying water powered circular motion to a grinding stone and therfore knew nothing of water-milling. Iolo Morgan wg (Edward Williams 1747-1826) who was amongst other things a chronicler of national events declared that watermills had supplanted the use of handmills (i.e. querns) in Wales by 340 A.D. This is open to conjecture as he also declared windmills were common place in Wales at the same time when windmills were not known in Britain for a further 8 centuries. What is known is that the first known reliable allusion to a mill powered by water is in Anglo-Saxon England in A.D. 762.

Certainly by the time of the Domesday survey mills abounded throughout England and presumably Wales and Scotland, although the Domesday survey was only concerned with England. Thus William I at the moment of hist conquest was possessor of the entire kingdom and all its possible sources of revenue this included its entire milling rights. As the land was partitioned out into baronies and again into manors so the milling rights passed on accordingly to the great landowners therefore being endowed with the sole right of building and working mills upon their estates. This was known as the law of Milling Soke. From William I to the beginning of Victorians reugn the owners from Kings to Abbots to Squires have continuously drawn large revenues from cornmills; have tenaciously held to their privileged monopoly of ownership; and when occasion has arisen heve upheld it by might as well as by legalised right.

Long after the introuduction of watermills the quern held its ground in public favour due to its convenience. Very often one quern served several families and was seen to be a highly valued part of a household. Early manorial lords in granting charters to their tenants ordinarily stipulated a reservation of all milling rights and privileges to themselves. This compelled tenants to attend the mills they erected and they prohibited the use of domestic querns. Similarly religious houses were endowed with gifts of mills, often as a form of donation - the charter of grant investing the monks with the sole right of grinding corn for the manor or district and prohibited the use of hand mills. These rights even extended to prohibiting the townspeople from using the services of another mill. To secure the entire trade and literally draw grist to the mill the manorial lords waged a war of extermiantion against querns. Some were purchased and some simply confiscated. In every case the usefulnessof the pair was destroyed by the breakingof the upper stone.

Among the most well known contacts or the suppression of the hand mills is a prolonged conflict at St Albans Abbey, Cirencester which began in 1274. The abbot being lord of the manner began by compelling the "giving up" of all handmills. To appease the wrath of the townspeople he agreed that his miller should solemnly take an oath to be honest. In the cade of any doubt arising as to the immaculate integrity of the miller and immediate inquest should be held before 12 jurors. This arrangement seems to have been maintained for 50 years or so when once more the townspeople rebelled and besieged the abbey extracting a charter of liberties from the abbot although they failed to secure a closure freeing them from compulsory grinding at the abbey mill. However, nothing dauted they immediately set up their querns again - about eighty in all. Six or seven years elapsed before the abbot, who had quietly bided his time, found it feasible to respond. A descebt was nade upon the town, houses were searched and handmills confiscated, the stones being carried off to the abbey where the abbot gravely paved the flour of his private parlour with them in testimony of the thorough subjugation of his foe. He and his successors walked over the paved floor far another half century until 1381 when, during Watt Tylers rebellion the townspeople again mustered courage and attacked the abbey gaining access they tore up the precious parlour floor broke the recovered stones to pieces and distributed the fragments among the tenants of the abbey as trophies of war. Their triumph was short lived; what the abbot could not achieve by physical force he accomplished by the law. His bailiffs made a raid upon the town and carried away more querns; the townspeople invoking the aid of the law brought an action agains him at Cirencester Assizen. At the trial the plaintiffs alleged that at different times the abbots bailiffs had broken into their houses, carried away and destroyed their private millstones. The abbots defence was simple, being lord of the manor and the complainants being legally bound to grind at the abbey mill he was justified in his action. This really was the fact and the justices had no option but to decide the matter in favour of the abbot. Accoringly 20 of the townspeople executed a deed on behalf of themselves, and the whole town withing the abbots manor admitting they had laid a false complaint agains their lord and agreeing to pay a find of £66 13s 4d and to grind their corn at the abbey mill.

Watermills and in many cases windmills continued to be the centre of milling over the centuries although no doubt many a peasant continued to illegally use their quern. The miller was the servant of the lord of the manor and had to extract a toll from the customer. This measure certainly varied over the centuries but generally seems to be recognised as 1/16 or 1 scoop in a bushel of wheat. The toll was originally "paid in kind" and each mill had an ark or bin to hold the milling corn he extracted as his toll. It is in connection with the toll that the charges of extortion levelled against millers arose and without doubt this was practised in some mills. Eventually mills took their toll in flour and they were careful to take the best of the flour which did not help the millers reputation. The miller, being a servant, was not particularly interested in improving the mill at which he labourded  and until the advent of steam in the 14th centure miller would probably have little difficulty in working in say, an early 17th centurey mill. By 1800 however there were various mills throughout the country worked by steam although fires in mills were not uncommon as flour dust is explosive and obviously steam power requires a source of fire.

Slowly though the trade was changing and roller mills began to appear particularly in the continent, Austria and Switzerland both being the foremost in roller mill development. By 1870 many British mills had been constructed using rollers exclusively and were generally built at the great ports Liverpool, Bristol, Newcastle, Southhampton, etc. etc. The mills having seen steam power come in as a reliable forn of power not subject to the vagaries of the weather were soon also able to choose between oil power (from the early diesel engines) and of course electricity, Water and wind powered stone mills began to close throughout the country although many continued well into the 20th century if they were situated in a rural area as they had some trade from local farmers who had not yet discovered the delights of the tractor with a PTO (power take off) to have a roller mill for milling their animal feed requirements.

By the 1940s Britain which at one time is estimated to have had 10,000 water or wind powered mills driving it is true to say not just flour mills but wollen mills, saw mills, etc. had shrunk to probably less than 50 of which flour mills would have comprised possibly 10 if that. By the 1970's the historical impotance of mills in Britain was being recognised and slowly local councils began to show a slight interest in preservation of the buildings. The Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings (SPAB), Wind and Watermill Section, was seriously concerned at the increasing loss of mills. Several mills were bought privately and slowly restored to full working order and in October 1981 the Welsh Mills Society (WMS) was formed to attempt to help and encourage the Welsh Mill owners. Despite the problems of Water Rights, Food Hygiene Laws, Trading Standards criteria and etc. by the late 1980's about 35 water and wind powered flour mills throughout Wales, England, Scotland and Ireland were trading.

Sadly, as I write this, I know if 5 mills in Wakes which have ceased trading in the last 12 months with several more for sale. To think there have been millers standing at water powered millstones for 2000 years is a remarkable thought showing how closely milling has been linked to human needs. Surviving now as an anachoronism, historically very importent mills show not only mans ingenuity in their siting and distance water was brought to power them but how non polluting renewable energy can be used. Water Millers and Wind millers laugh at power cuts smile at oil price increases and continue to mill flour. Mills for the basis for engineering and are easily understood, gears can be seen turning showing gear ratios, power take offs were seen centuries before the farmers with their tractors wood has been sawn, needles manufactured, blast furnaces powered, cloth woven, water pumped out of mine shafts all by mills.

You needed mills - Mills now need you! Hence the title of this article:

Support your local Mill

IF YOU ARE LUCKY ENOUGH TO HAVE ONE

