# Why I am a Miller or Why am I a miller?
## Part I
I was standing on the edge of the mill pond early one cold Feburary morning watching the rain drizzling steadily as it had for the last 24 hours. I was idly shaking my left leg to which was clinging a ten pound, or so, Muscovy drake, regoicing in the name of "Yesterday". He is the only bird amongst our collection of 40 plus waterfowl who had arrived from nowhere and stayed. A perculiar bird, he indiscriminantly stalks and occasionally attacks visitors, my father-in-law, my daughters and me. His favoured method of attack is springing at athe knee and clinging on to the leg (He managed to put an 8" tear in my father-in-law's trouser leg). If feeling more athletic he leaps for the shoulders and flaps his wings around the unfortunate victims ears. This display of avian skill is usually accompanied by a continuous, harsh, puffing noise. Over the two years he has been with us I have grown quite used to his strange methods of showing affection (or dislike) for the human race. I was therefore uncincernedly shaking my leg, in my usual counter attack, which is to dislodge him and drop him into the pond.
Another idiosyncrasy of Yesterdays is his dislike of water. He has never been known to enter the water voluntarily preferring to stay around the pomd edge looking for his next victim. I at lest succeeded and he fell into the water, immediately getting out looking extermely bedtaggled. Maybe his mother never taught him how to oil his feathers I mused, maybe he never had a mother and was trying to vent his spite on me, my father-in-law, etc etc.
With these inconsequential thoughts running through my head I finished letting out the ducks, looked hopefully, but unsuccessfully for eggs and headed towards the mill. Feburary was not noted as being a good month for duck eggs. At least ther was plenty if water, the drought of last summer now but a distant impleasant memory. The more present threat at the moment being frost. The pond had been covered in a sheet of ice, thich enough to skate on and 10 feet icicles had festooned the head race and waterwheel very recently. This had necessitated breaking off all the ice clining to the wheel which very effectively stopped any movement even under the full volume of water. Considering the problems of milling when the temperature is well below freezing and fresh from my encounter with "Yesterday" I suddenly thought "Why am I a Miller"?
My wife and I had bought "THE MILL", as we always thought of it, about seven years ago. Originally we had bought it as it adjoined our property, Mill House, and there were rights of way over various access areas common to both the mill and the house. Shared access, in our experience, often led to neighbour problems. Good fences make good neighbours is a very true saying. Living and working abroad we had visited "THE MILL" for bried periods whilst home on holiday and knew as much about milling as any other layman - flour came out of a bag, corn grew in a field, oats had long whiskers and wild oats were to be sown when young. We would stand and look at the collapsed machinery, the choked tail race and the gently disintegrating wheel and wonder what we would, or could, do with it. The mill pond lay under 6 feet of rubble and earth, dumped as a convenient location when redeveloping St Dogmeals Abbey in the 1950's. I photographed various pieces of machinery and heneral views, measured the mill and did rough sketches and we returned to Teheran, Iran. During the long months ahead I would pull out the photographs, try to remember which way up they should be, ask myself "What is a wallower" and wonder how fast a millstone should turn. I was about to find out!

## Part 2
As the revolution of Ayatollah Khomeini gathered impetus it became clear that our stay in Iran was going to be curtailed. I was offered a job in Saudi Arabia but schooling for our teenage daughters would be a problem, also a desire to return to a climate where the sun was a welcome visitor not an ever present source of extreme heat persuaded us to return home. Teheran International Airport was closed so we eventually headed home for Wales on an RAF evacuation flight. As a result we were limited to a suitcase each leaving our furniture etc to the landlord of our house in nothern Teheran. More distressing was the fact that I, together with many other expatriate employees, were owed several thousand pounds in back pay, bonuses etc. This was not, and has not, been forthcoming.
We eventually reached St. Dogmeals in late March 1979 and had to rent a nearby house for a couple of months as our own house was on a rental agreement until the end of my contract in Iran. Luckily the people renting our house had bought a house of their own and wanted to leave Mill House early. We finally moved back home on May 1st 1979.
I then began to seriously look at "THE MILL". With no visible mill pond or tail race, the mill itself covered in ivy which had just begun to lift the roofing slates it was a daunting prospect. I did not have a job and did not want to use the money we had saved during our stay in Iran which was earmarked for the restoration. I commenced work on the ivy, the diameter of which in places was in excess of five inches and considered ways of earning a living.
One of the requirements of restoring the mill was a supply of timber of unusual widths and thicknesses and for the mill wheel unseasoned timber was required. A nearby friend, John Paynter, a local firniture maker of some repute, suggested I should buy a portable chainsaw mill and cut my own wood. This novel idea was to prove very fruitful. John and I went to a demonstration of the chainsaw mill and we were both very impressed. He was also interested in a supply of timber for his own business and was prepared to buy wood from me, if it was suitable for his requirements. I purchased a chainsaw mill and began to learn about chainsaws, trees and hard work. (For the past 15 years I had earned a living sitting at a desk, wining and dining with clients or being wined and dined) I had met an ex-farmer who was interested in my chain saw mill so together we set out to cut wood for a trial period. To our surprise (and delight) not only was our venture successful but where ecer we went a small crownd gathered to watch our timber planking operation and work began to accumulate the timber I needed to rebuild the waterwheel and to start building the head race flume. I planned to use the unseasoned oak for the wheel spokes and unseasined elm fot the wheel buckets and the flume.
In my spare time I finished stripping the ivy and commenced to digout the tail race to uncover the skeleton of the wheel. Helped by one of my brothers I also dug some trial holes to find the pond edges and bottom.
I soon found that I needed professional help to dig out the pond and rebuild various walls. A local builder was very interested in the whold project and gave me a very competitive quote on the outside work, contacted a nearby JCB contractor and we commenced digging the pond out in earnest.
On Easter Sunday 1981 the St. Dogmeals mill pond was reflooded for the first time in over 30 years. The new sluice gate and overflow worked and the pond held water. I commenced work on the waterwheel.
I had met Dai Lewis (better known as Dai'r Felin) from St. Davids. He had been to visit me at the mill, give me a lot of help and information and offered be the wheel from his mill which had ceased working. I was in need of a new rim for my wheek and was very pleased to accept his offer. By June 1981 the wheel was rebuilt, John Paynter had made all the necessary woodwork inside the mill, the machinery was back in position, Dai'r Failin was in position as "FIRST DAY ADVISIOR" and "THE MILL" produced flour again for the first time in 50 years -- I was a miller!
Four years on athe mill is now fully renovated. The kiln works (a seperate story in its own right) and we now offer for sale a full range of traditional wholemeal flours, unbleached white flour, btad, oatmeal, semolita and various specialist flours. The timber business continues and flourishes under the name of Dyfed Tree Surgery, I know what a wallower is and Yesterday is thriving. People visit and say "Oh, you have an idyllic existence here don't you". My wife and I look at each other and smile, think of our 15 hour working day but then remember the traffic jams, communting to work, boredom, working at a desk bound job and I know why I am miller!
